Using Weblate for translation (#142)
r-devel/rdevguide: 08-message-translations.Rmd

sources at `./src/library/translations/inst` in various
language-specific subdirectories.

## How to contribute new translations

<!-- TODO(michaelchirico): Creating and editing .po files, testing the translations worked, **encoding**, translation teams, release schedule -->

Translating R into different languages helps make it more user-friendly
for non-English speakers and grow the R community. Also, read the blog
how [R can use your help: Translating R
message](https://blog.r-project.org/2022/07/25/r-can-use-your-help-translating-r-messages).

To get started with new translation, please follow the steps below:

Step 1: Register an Account at Weblate

Weblate is an open-source platform for collaborative translation of
software projects, including R. Register an account at
<https://translate.rx.studio/> to start contributing.

Step 2: Choose a Component and Language

Select a component of R with less than 100% translation. You can start
with sections like utils, base (R files), or tools (R files). Then you
can select your preferred language.

![](img/translate_component.png)

Step 3: Check String Status

Click on "Unfinished strings" to see the strings of messages that need

> translation.

Author: I have modified it as per your suggestions

Here:

-   Translated Strings: Already translated.
-   Review Pending Strings: Translated strings awaiting review.
-   Untranslated/Incomplete Strings: Strings requiring translation.

![](img/unfinished_strings_translate.png)

Step 4: Translate the Message

Translate the message by typing the translation in the text box.

![](img/translate_string_and_save.png)

Click "Save and Continue" to save the translation and continue. The
translation team will review and integrate it into the R interface if it
meets the quality standards.

- Note: If you're unsure about the translate, please check needs editing. This will ensure other reviewer will check and verify if your translations are correct.

> Some Tips to follow:

Reviewer: Other tips to document:

- Use Automatic Suggestions (machine translation) as a starting point (this may need more than a bullet point to explain how to do this)
- Look at how other languages have translated the string. Even if you are not fluent in another language it can give you an idea of how other translators have handled it, especially which parts are left verbatim.

> - Be consistent: Use the same words and phrases throughout the translation to make it consistent and avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: thoughts on mentioning the glossary feature within weblate? see https://translate.rx.studio/projects/r-project/glossary/

- Use concise language: This will ensure the translated messages are short and easy to read

> - Review the translations: After finishing the translation, check if you have any alerts or warning in the weblate string status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check for technical issues: After finishing the translation, check if you have any alerts or warning in the weblate string status, e.g. double instead of single space.
```
